[Music]
good morning to you welcome to breakfast
with roger johnson and louise minchin
hello good morning our headlines today a
huge step forward in the fight against
coronavirus as the oxford astrazeneca
vaccine
is approved by the uk regulator the
government has ordered 100 million doses
and the first vaccinations will take
place on monday
the approval of the oxford astrazeneca
vaccine it brings forward
the date at which we're going to bring
this pandemic to an end
but millions of people are said to be
moved into the highest tier of
restrictions
as the nhs struggles to cope with a
record record number
of coronavirus cases
boris johnson urges mps to back his
brexit trade deal in a vote
later on today and it's a coldest start
to winter
so far with temperatures at the moment
around minus 10 in parts of scotland
more wintry showers to come today with a
mixture of rain sleet and snow mainly in
the west i'll have all the details here
on breakfast well good morning it's
wednesday the 30th of
december our top story this morning an
hour ago it was confirmed that the
oxford astrazeneca vaccine
has been approved for use by the uk
medicines regulator
it is the second coronavirus vaccine to
be given the green light
and is expected to be delivered from
next week earlier we spoke to the health
secretary matt hancock who said
it was good news for everyone
this is a really significant moment in
the fight against this pandemic
because the vaccine is the way out and
the approval of the oxford astrazeneca
vaccine it brings forward
the date at which we're going to bring
this pandemic to an end
and so it's good news for everybody
everybody watching
uh and the whole country this is a real
british success story
and so it is this is really good news
this morning
that the vaccine has not just been
approved but
also that they find that the
immunity to the disease comes after
around a fortnight after the first dose
which means that we can really
accelerate the number of people who
who get protected i was a health
secretary matt hancock speaking to us a
little earlier on bbc breakfast we're
joined now by the bbc's medical editor
fergus walsh fergus good morning to you
and thank you for
for joining us again just explain for
people i mean obviously we've had a
vaccine already with the pfizer biontech
one but
why this one specifically is so
important
it's important because unlike the fisa
bionte
vaccine this one can be stored in your
fridge
my fridge it can be transported at
fridge temperature whereas the pfizer
jab
has to be very carefully handled uh and
transported at minus 70. so that
immediately takes away the problems
about getting it into to village
surgeries
into care homes and globally it's
important too
because astrazeneca is planning to
produce three billion doses of this
vaccine in 2021 and it'll be play a
really important
role in trying to bring the global
pandemic to an
end and can you just explain fergus what
we understand now about the rollout
who'll get it when etc
so a very very interesting shift in
strategy here
on both the oxford and the pfizer jabs
that initially the pfizer jab there was
a three-week interval between
dosing and the oxford trials it was a
four-week
interval between dosing but now the
government is saying
that the nhs will provide both these
vaccines with
up to a 12-week interval between
first and second dosing and that's an
important shift because it means that
millions potentially tens of millions of
more people will be protected because
they
simply won't be doing the the second
dose straight away
and it'll allow this race between
the vaccine and the virus it'll allow us
hopefully
to protect many many more people which
is urgently needed
given the really grim news we've been
hearing about cases
and the impact on the nhs and some
people might listen to that and feel
slightly anxious that they might get
their first shot and then
it might wear off effectively by the
time the second shot comes along 12
weeks later but
is this this obviously isn't just a
political decision there's science
behind
why they're able to do this there is
science behind this on both the vaccines
uh protection uh kicks in two to
three weeks afterwards and for example
on the oxford trials
three weeks after getting their first
dose of vaccine
um nobody who received the oxford jab
was then hospitalized with covid19 with
severe covid
so it will protect against severe
disease
it might not stop you getting a coveted
infection it might not stop you getting
a little bit ill
but the key thing is if it prevents
people
being so ill they are admitted to
hospital that would
really blunt this pandemic so
there's very good evidence on that
people do need their second dose but
what this will allow
is more people to get that initial
protection
and will the the the the roll out in
terms of who gets it and when
will that remain the same for this as
was already outlined
for the pfizer biontech one yes that
will remain
um so it's the over 80s and then
after the over 80s are done we'll then
go in tranches of five years the
75 plus the 70 plus um
frontline nhs workers and care home
workers and people in care homes
obviously also at the top of the list
and then some other really important
groups
people who are extremely clinically
vulnerable
will be part of that and also
people with underlying health conditions
about 25 million people
in the first tranche of the over 50s and
once all of those are immunized
that would take away about 99
of those at risk of dying from kovid 19
but
an absolutely massive task to do that it
would
involve really two million people a week
would need to be immunized between now
and easter in order for all those people
to have just one
dose of either the pfizer or the oxford
astrazeneca vaccine
which would be a remarkable schedule to
try and
try and stick to um it's
been unprecedented hasn't it in the way
in which scientists around the world
have
have worked together here in order to go
towards this common goal in record
time it's been absolutely astounding and
and i would gently point uh viewers if
that if they'd like to
see behind the story of this there's
there's a
uh documentary on iplayer the race for a
vaccine which follows the year
that it took the oxford um team
to create the vaccine and do all the
trials
crunch all the data um and it's been a
remarkable story an incredible
achievement
for a university an academic institution
oxford university
to create and then do the trials of this
vaccine and then in partnership
with astrazeneca to then be in the
position where they will have more doses
at the end of next year than any other
covid vaccine to get that approved
is really really remarkable fergus thank
you ever so much for joining us again
this morning
on breakfast i wasn't aware i was going
to lead you nicely into a trail for a
program on iplayer there but it sounds
well worth watching
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news